docs: Revisions to /concepts/transactions pages (#24425)
MystenLabs/sui: docs/content/concepts/transactions.mdx

keywords: [ types of transactions, transactions on sui, system transactions, programmable transaction blocks, ptbs, transaction metadata, transaction flow]
---

Every update on Sui, whether to the network itself or to objects on the network, happens through a transaction. Transactions handle everything from creating objects and minting assets to managing network operations.

Sui has two types of transactions:

- **Programmable transaction blocks (PTBs)**: Enable everyday network activities like deploying smart contracts and sending tokens. Anyone can create and submit PTBs.

- **System transactions**: Manage network events such as epoch changes and checkpoint creation. Only validators can submit system transactions.

## Transaction metadata

Programmable transaction blocks have the following metadata fields:

> - **Sender address**: The [address](/guides/developer/getting-started/get-address.mdx) of the user sending the transaction.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Sender address:** The [address](/guides/developer/getting-started/get-address.mdx) of the user sending the transaction.
```

> - **Gas input**: A reference pointing to the object used to pay for the transaction's execution and storage. This object must be owned by the sender address and must be of type `sui::coin::Coin<SUI>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Gas input:** A reference pointing to the object used to pay for the transaction's execution and storage. The sender address must own the object and it must be of type `sui::coin::Coin<SUI>`.
```

- **Gas price**: An unsigned integer specifying the number of native tokens per gas unit the transaction pays. The gas price must be greater than zero.

- **Maximum gas budget**: The maximum number of gas units that can be used to execute the transaction. If execution exceeds this budget, the transaction aborts without any effects except charging the gas input object. The gas input object must have a balance greater than or equal to the gas price multiplied by the maximum gas budget. This product represents the maximum amount that can be charged for the transaction.

- **Epoch**: The epoch this transaction is intended for.

- **Type**: Identifies whether the transaction is a call, publish, or native transaction and its type-specific data.

- **Authenticator**: A cryptographic signature and a public key that verifies against the signature and is cryptographically committed to by the sender address.

> - **Expiration**: An epoch reference that sets a deadline after which validators no longer consider the transaction valid. The optional expiration epoch reference enables users to define transactions that either execute and commit by a set time (current epoch less than or equal to expiration epoch), or never execute after the deadline passes. By default, there is no deadline for when a transaction must execute. 

Author: ```suggestion
- **Type:** Identifies whether the transaction is a call, publish, or native transaction and its type-specific data.

- **Authenticator:** A cryptographic signature and a public key that verifies against the signature and is cryptographically committed to by the sender address.

- **Expiration:** An epoch reference that sets a deadline after which validators no longer consider the transaction valid. The optional expiration epoch reference enables users to define transactions that either execute and commit by a set time (current epoch less than or equal to expiration epoch), or never execute after the deadline passes. By default, there is no deadline for when a transaction must execute. 
```
